feat(blog): explain the sans-IO design pattern (#5675)
CloudFire-LLC/cloudfire: website/src/app/blog/sans-io/readme.mdx

> At firezone, we build secure remote access that scales, be it from your Android phone, MacOS computer or Linux server.

Author: ```suggestion
import Image from "next/image";

At firezone, we build secure remote access that scales, be it from your Android phone, MacOS computer or Linux server.
```

Here is how we could implement this using `tokio`'s `UdpSocket` (thank you to Cloudflare for the public STUN server):

```rust
#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> anyhow::Result<()> {
    let socket = UdpSocket::bind("0.0.0.0:0").await?;
    socket.connect("stun.cloudflare.com:3478").await?;
    socket.send(&make_binding_request()).await?;

    let mut buf = vec![0u8; 100];
    let num_read = socket.recv(&mut buf).await?;
    let address = parse_binding_response(&buf[..num_read]);

    println!("Our public IP is: {address}");

    Ok(())
}
```

This could be also be written using blocking IO from the standard library:

```rust
fn main() -> anyhow::Result<()> {
    let socket = UdpSocket::bind("0.0.0.0:0")?;
    socket.connect("stun.cloudflare.com:3478")?;
    socket.send(&make_binding_request())?;

    let mut buf = vec![0u8; 100];
    let num_read = socket.recv(&mut buf)?;
    let address = parse_binding_response(&buf[..num_read]);

    println!("Our public IP is: {address}");

    Ok(())
}
```

> You can find all of these snippets as working programs in the following repository: https://firezone/sans-io-blog-example.

Author: ```suggestion
You can find all of these snippets as working programs in the following repository: https://github.com/firezone/sans-io-blog-example.
```

> You can find all of these snippets as working programs in the following repository: https://github.com/firezone/sans-io-blog-example.

Author: I have the repo ready locally but don't have permission to make one.

Reviewer: I'll create it real quick.

Reviewer: https://github.com/firezone/sans-io-blog-example

Sequential actions require more boilerplate.
In Rust, `async` functions compile down to state machines, with each `.await` point representing a transition to a different state.
This makes it easy for developers to write sequential code.
Without `async`, we need to write our own state machines for expressing the various steps.
How annoying this will be in practise depends on your problem domain.
Modelling a request-response protocol is not very difficult as we've seen in the example of a `StunBinding`.

Finally, the sans-IO design is not particularly wide-spread (yet) in the Rust community.
As a result, there are very few libraries out there that follow it.
Most of them will either implement blocking or non-blocking IO instead of sans-IO.

## Closing

Writing sans-IO code is unusual at first but really enjoyable once you get the hang of it.
In part, this is because Rust provides great tools for modelling state machines.
More so, the fact that sans-IO forces you to handle errors as you would any other input simply feels like the way networking code should be written.

> Discuss this post on [Hackernews](TODO) or [Reddit](TODO).

Author: These need to be filled in after publishing.

Reviewer: 👍

Reviewer: Obligatory reminder about linking HN is we don't ever want to share the links directly to avoid the vote-ring detection they have, which will bury the post.

Author: So we can't link directly to the comment thread? That is a bit stupid. Then we don't need to coordinate anything around publishing the post.

Yet, once you go beneath the surface of the library, you will discover something that is perhaps unusual:
There are almost no calls to `tokio::spawn`, all communication is multiplexed via a single UDP socket and the same APIs appear to repeat themselves across various layers: `handle_timeout`, `poll_transmit`, `handle_input`, ...

These are the tell-tales of a sans-IO design.
Instead of sending & receiving bytes via a socket in multiple places, our protocols are implemented as pure state machines.
Even time is abstracted away:
Every function that needs to know the current time receives an `Instant` parameter instead of calling `Instant::now` itself.
This pattern isn't something that we invented!
The Python world even has a dedicated [website](https://sans-io.readthedocs.io/) about it.
In Rust, it is used by libraries such as:

- [`quinn`](https://github.com/quinn-rs/quinn/tree/main/quinn-proto), an independent QUIC implementation.
- [`quiche`](https://github.com/cloudflare/quiche/tree/master/quiche), cloudflare's QUIC implementation.
- [`str0m`](https://github.com/algesten/str0m), a sans-IO WebRTC implementation.

> In this post, we'll go over what it means to build a sans-IO networking library, why we think it is a good idea and lastly, why Rust lends itself particularly well to this pattern.

Reviewer: Prepend to this list "some of the problems with doing IO the traditional way".

## Rust's async model & the "function colouring" debate

> 

Reviewer: Might be worth elaborating on this section more with examples. It serves as our problem statement.

Author: You mean more examples in addition to the two? Or which concept do you think needs an example?

Reviewer: Scratch that, I see the examples now!

```rust
#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> anyhow::Result<()> {
    let socket = UdpSocket::bind("0.0.0.0:0").await?;
    socket.connect("stun.cloudflare.com:3478").await?;
    socket.send(&make_binding_request()).await?;

    let mut buf = vec![0u8; 100];
    let num_read = socket.recv(&mut buf).await?;
    let address = parse_binding_response(&buf[..num_read]);

    println!("Our public IP is: {address}");

    Ok(())
}
```

This could be also be written using blocking IO from the standard library:

```rust
fn main() -> anyhow::Result<()> {
    let socket = UdpSocket::bind("0.0.0.0:0")?;
    socket.connect("stun.cloudflare.com:3478")?;
    socket.send(&make_binding_request())?;

    let mut buf = vec![0u8; 100];
    let num_read = socket.recv(&mut buf)?;
    let address = parse_binding_response(&buf[..num_read]);

    println!("Our public IP is: {address}");

    Ok(())
}
```

You can find all of these snippets as working programs in the following repository: https://github.com/firezone/sans-io-blog-example.

Notice how this code is virtually identical apart from the use of `async`?

> If we wanted to write a library that allows you to perform STUN, we'd have to decide on one of them or include both.

Reviewer: You can add little call outs for moments like this where you introduce new terminology the reader may not be familiar with, for example.

at the top: `import Alert from "@/components/DocsAlert";`

and then in the body:

```
<Alert color="info">
  STUN forms one pillar of a NAT traversal technique known as ICE. Read more about how that works here.
</Alert>
```

Author: Thanks! I'll see where I can fit it in! In this case, ICE and STUN are already somewhat explained before I introduce the examples. Do you think that isn't enough?

```rust
impl StunBinding {
    fn handle_input(&mut self, packet: &[u8], now: Instant) {
        let address = parse_binding_response(packet);

        self.state = State::Received { address, at: now };
    }
}
```

The eventloop also changed slightly.
Instead of exiting once we know our public IP, we'll now loop until the user quits the program:

```rust
    loop {
        if let Some(transmit) = binding.poll_transmit() {
            socket.send_to(&transmit.payload, transmit.dst).await?;
            continue;
        }

        let mut buf = vec![0u8; 100];

        tokio::select! {
            Some(time) = &mut timer => {
                binding.handle_timeout(time);
            },
            res = socket.recv(&mut buf) => {
                let num_read = res?;
                binding.handle_input(&buf[..num_read], Instant::now());

            }
        }

        timer.reset_to(binding.poll_timeout());

        if let Some(address) = binding.public_address() {
            println!("Our public IP is: {address}");
        }
    }
```

## The premise of sans-IO

So far, all of this seems like a very excessive overhead for sending a few UDP packets back and forth.

> Surely, the 10 line example above is preferable over this state machine and the eventloop!

Reviewer: minor clarification?

```suggestion
Surely, the 10 line example introduced at the start is preferable over this state machine and the eventloop!
```

The eventloop is responsible for "querying" the state (like `poll_transmit`), executing it and also passing new input to the state machine (`handle_timeout` and `handle_input`).
To some people, this may appear as unnecessary boilerplate but it comes with a great benefit: flexibility.

* Want to make use of `sendmmsg` to reduce the number of syscalls when sending packets? No problem.
* Want to multiplex multiple protocols over a single socket? No problem.

Writing the eventloop yourself is an opportunity to be able to tune our code to exactly what we want it to do.
This also makes maintenance easier for library authors: They can focus on correctly implementing protocol functionality instead of having debates around async runtimes or exposing APIs to set socket options.

A good example here is `str0m`’s stance on the gathering of candidates:
This is an IO concern and up to the application on how to achieve it.
`str0m` only provides an API to add such an ICE candidate to the current state.
As a result, we are able to easily implementation optimisations such as gathering TURN candidates prior to any connection being made, thus reducing firezone's connection-setup latency.

> ### Testing at the speed of light

Reviewer: Would it be worth expanding on this section a bit more about the issues we face testing Firezone in CI? Or save that for another article?

We could do a part 2 or something where we detail our CI/CD architecture and how we are chipping away at testing closer and closer to the damn socket from either side of the IO boundary.

Author: > Would it be worth expanding on this section a bit more about the issues we face testing Firezone in CI? Or save that for another article?
> 
> We could do a part 2 or something where we detail our CI/CD architecture and how we are chipping away at testing closer and closer to the damn socket from either side of the IO boundary.

I think it is worth doing an entire article on "How we test Firezone". I am only touching on this topic here as a benefit of sans-IO. Talking more about testing seems off-topic.

To see a real world example of this, [check out](https://github.com/firezone/firezone/blob/53557f46e452c0fe5195a4326873753a356c6005/rust/connlib/snownet/tests/lib.rs#L123-L127) how we test that `snownet` closes idle connections after 5 minutes.

Similarly, actually sending data over a socket takes (a little bit of) time and more importantly, requires allocation of ports etc.
In a sans-IO world, "sending data" in a test is as simple as taking a `Transmit` from party B and calling `handle_input` on the state of party A.
No need to go through a network socket!

At firezone, we took this idea one step further.
We implemented a reference state machine that describes how we want `connlib` to work.
This reference state machine is used as the source of truth in our tests.
We then leverage `proptest`'s support for [state machine testing](https://proptest-rs.github.io/proptest/proptest/state-machine.html) to deterministically sample and execute thousands of scenarios on every CI run and compare the reference state machine with `connlib`'s actual state.
The details of this go beyond the scope of this post but we are planning to publish one about that topic in particular too!

> The key take-away here is that a sans-IO design enables these kind of tests.

Reviewer: It might be cool to conclude this section with a screenshot of the proptest wall time in CI (a few seconds?) on the GH free runners.

Author: It is actually closer to a minute with level 1 optimisations. But we also run 1000 tests with 1-20 transitions each :)

import Image from "next/image";
import Alert from "@/components/DocsAlert";

> At firezone, we build secure remote access that scales, be it from your Android

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At Firezone, we build secure remote access that scales, be it from your Android
```

phone, MacOS computer or Linux server. At the core of these apps sits a

> connectivity library - aptly named `connlib` - that manages network connections

Reviewer: Maybe a link at the first mention?

```suggestion
connectivity library - aptly named [`connlib`](https://www.github.com/firezone/firezone/tree/main/rust/connlib) - that manages network connections
```

> and wireguard tunnels to secure your traffic. After several iterations, we’ve

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and WireGuard tunnels to secure your traffic. After several iterations, we’ve
```

landed on a design that we are extremely happy with. It gives us blazingly fast
and exhaustive tests, deep customisation and overall high assurance that it does
what we want it to do.

`connlib` is built in Rust and the design we are talking about is known as
sans-IO. Rust's premise of speed and memory-safety makes it a great choice for
building network services. Most parts of our Rust stack aren't particularly
surprising: We use the `tokio` runtime for asynchronous tasks, `tungstenite` for
WebSockets, `boringtun` for the WireGuard implementation, `rustls` to encrypt
traffic with the API, etc. Yet, once you go beneath the surface of the library,
you will discover something that is perhaps unusual: There are almost no calls
to `tokio::spawn`, all communication is multiplexed via a single UDP socket and
the same APIs appear to repeat themselves across various layers:

> `handle_timeout`, `poll_transmit`, `handle_input`, ...

Reviewer: nit

```suggestion
`handle_timeout`, `poll_transmit`, `handle_input`, and so on.
```

> These are the tell-tales of a sans-IO design. Instead of sending & receiving

Reviewer: minor nit

```suggestion
These are the tell-tale signs of a sans-IO design. Instead of sending and receiving
```

bytes via a socket in multiple places, our protocols are implemented as pure

> state machines. Even time is abstracted away: Every function that needs to know

Reviewer: ```suggestion
state machines. Even time is abstracted away: every function that needs to know
```

important part of function's API contract. The fact that Rust enforces this at
compile-time is a good thing.

A result of this constraint is that an async function deep down in your stack
"forces" every calling function to also become async in order to `.await` the
inner function. This can be problematic if the code you want to call isn't
actually yours but a dependency that you are pulling in.

Some people see this as a problem and they would like to write code that is
agnostic over the "asyncness" of their dependencies. That concern has merit.
Ultimately, at the very bottom of each async call stack sits a `Future` that
needs to suspend on something. Usually, this is some form of IO, like writing to
a socket, reading from a file, waiting for time to advance, etc. The majority of
async functions however don't actually perform async work themselves. Instead,
they are only async because they depend on other async functions. The code
around those inner async functions would usually also work in a blocking
context, but the author of your dependency happened to pick the async variant.

Let's look at an example of this problem. Firezone's connectivity library

> `connlib` uses ICE and as part of that, we utilise STUN to discover our

Reviewer: I think this is the first mention?

```suggestion
`connlib` in part implements [ICE](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8445) for NAT traversal and as part of that, we utilise STUN to discover our
```

Author: What is wrong with "uses"? We don't actually implement ICE ourselves, that is what we depend on str0m for. The only ICE bits that we do ourselves is candidate-gathering. I'd prefer to stick to "use" but I am happy link to the RFC. This is the first mention of it after all.

policy code is the same, yet it is the one we want to test and perhaps share
with others via libraries, regardless of whether or not we use blocking or
non-blocking IO.

## Applying dependency inversion

How do we apply the dependency inversion principle then? We introduce
abstractions! When we call `UdpSocket::send`, what data are we actually passing?
The payload, a `SocketAddr` and - implicitly - the socket itself. The socket can
also be identified by means of a `SocketAddr`: The one we bound to earlier in
our application. Let's package these three things up into an abstraction. Meet
`Transmit`:

```rust
pub struct Transmit {
    src: SocketAddr,
    dst: SocketAddr,
    payload: Vec<u8>
}
```

Anywhere where we'd like to send data over our `UdpSocket`, we should instead
emit a `Transmit`. But that is only one half of the solution. Where does the
`Transmit` go? We need to execute this `Transmit` somewhere! This is the 2nd
half of any sans-IO application. Recall the definition of the
dependency-inversion principle: Policies should not depend on implementations,
instead both should depend on abstractions. `Transmit` is our abstraction and we

> already know that we need to re-write our policy code to use it. The actual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
already know that we need to rewrite our policy code to use it. The actual
```

implementation details, i.e. our `UdpSocket` also needs to be made aware of our
new abstraction.

This is where eventloops come in. sans-IO code needs to be "driven", almost
similarly as to how a `Future` in Rust is lazy and needs to be polled by a
runtime to make progress.

Eventloops are the implementation of our side-effects and will actually call
`UdpSocket::send`. That way, the rest of the code turns into a state machine
that only expresses, what should happen at a given moment.

### The state machine

The state machine diagram for our STUN binding request looks like this:

<Image

>   width={500}

Reviewer: I think you need both, but NextJS will maintain original proportions when scaling.

```suggestion
  height={800}
  width={800}
```

  className="rounded shadow mx-auto"
  src="/images/blog/sans-io/stun-binding-state-machine1.svg"
  alt="A UML state diagram for a STUN binding request."
/>

> Without execute the side-effect of sending a message directly, we need to

Reviewer: executing?

```suggestion
Without executing the side-effect of sending a message directly, we need to
```

get away with a pretty simple eventloop:

```rust
fn main() -> anyhow::Result<()> {
    let socket = UdpSocket::bind("0.0.0.0:0")?;
    let server = "stun.cloudflare.com:3478"
        .to_socket_addrs()?
        .next()
        .context("Failed to resolve hostname")?;
    let mut binding = StunBinding::new(server);

    let address = loop {
        if let Some(transmit) = binding.poll_transmit() {
            socket.send_to(&transmit.payload, transmit.dst)?;
            continue;
        }

        let mut buf = vec![0u8; 100];
        let num_read = socket.recv(&mut buf)?;

        binding.handle_input(&buf[..num_read]);

        if let Some(address) = binding.public_address() {
            break address;
        }
    };

    println!("Our public IP is: {address}");

    Ok(())
}
```

Notice how the eventloop is slightly more generic than the previous versions?
The eventloop does not make any assumptions about the details of the STUN
binding protocol. It doesn't know that it is request-response for example! From
the eventloop's perspective, multiple message could be necessary before we can
figure out our public address.

> UDP is an unreliable protocol, meaning our packets could get lost in transit. Do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UDP is an unreliable protocol, meaning our packets could get lost in transit. To
```

        let last_received_at = match self.state {
            State::Sent => return,
            State::Received { at, .. } => at,
        };

        if now.duration_since(last_received_at) < Duration::from_secs(5) {
            return;
        }

        self.buffered_transmits.push_front(Transmit {
            dst: self.server,
            payload: make_binding_request(),
        });
        self.state = State::Sent;
    }

    /// Returns the timestamp when we next expect `handle_timeout` to be called.
    fn poll_timeout(&self) -> Option<Instant> {
        match self.state {
            State::Sent => None,
            State::Received { at, .. } => Some(at + Duration::from_secs(5)),
        }
    }

    // ...
}
```

The only other changes I've made are adding an `at` field to the
`State::Received` variant that gets set to the current time upon `handle_input`:

```rust
impl StunBinding {
    fn handle_input(&mut self, packet: &[u8], now: Instant) {
        let address = parse_binding_response(packet);

        self.state = State::Received { address, at: now };
    }
}
```

This is an updated version of our state diagram:

<Image

>   width={500}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  height={800}
  width={800}
```

/>

The eventloop also changed slightly. Instead of exiting once we know our public
IP, we'll now loop until the user quits the program:

```rust
    loop {
        if let Some(transmit) = binding.poll_transmit() {
            socket.send_to(&transmit.payload, transmit.dst).await?;
            continue;
        }

        let mut buf = vec![0u8; 100];

        tokio::select! {
            Some(time) = &mut timer => {
                binding.handle_timeout(time);
            },
            res = socket.recv(&mut buf) => {
                let num_read = res?;
                binding.handle_input(&buf[..num_read], Instant::now());

            }
        }

        timer.reset_to(binding.poll_timeout());

        if let Some(address) = binding.public_address() {
            println!("Our public IP is: {address}");
        }
    }
```

## The premise of sans-IO

So far, all of this seems like a very excessive overhead for sending a few UDP
packets back and forth. Surely, the 10 line example introduced at the start is
preferable over this state machine and the eventloop! The example might be, but
recall the debate around function colouring. In a code snippet without

> dependencies like the above example, using `async` seems like a no brainer and

Reviewer: nit

```suggestion
dependencies like the above example, using `async` seems like a no-brainer and
```

really easy. The problem arises once you want to bring in dependencies.
Composing your functionality (i.e. policy) on top of those dependencies imposes
their decisions around async vs blocking IO on you. Libraries like `str0m` or
`quinn-proto` which are written in the sans-IO way don't do that. Instead, they
are pure state machines and thus the decision about async vs blocking IO or
which async runtime to use is deferred to the application.

Freedom to use either blocking or non-blocking IO isn't the only benefit to
this. sans-IO design also compose very well, tend to have very flexible APIs,
are easy to test and play well with Rust's features. Let's explore these
additional benefits one by one.

### Easy composition

Take another look at the API of `StunBinding`. The main functions exposed to the

> eventloop are: `handle_timeout`, `handle_input`, `poll_transmit` &

Reviewer: ```suggestion
eventloop are: `handle_timeout`, `handle_input`, `poll_transmit` and
```

`poll_timeout`. None of these are specific to the domain of STUN! Most network
protocols can be implemented with these or some variation of them. As a result,

> it is very easy to compose these state machines together: Want to query 5 STUN

Reviewer: nit

```suggestion
it is very easy to compose these state machines together: want to query 5 STUN
```

servers for your public IP? No problem. Just make 5 `StunBinding`s and call them
in order[^3].

> In the case of firezone, you can see this in the example of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of Firezone, you can see this in the example of
```

[`snownet`](https://github.com/firezone/firezone/tree/main/rust/connlib/snownet),

> a library that combines ICE & wireguard and thereby exposes "magic" IP tunnels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a library that combines ICE and WireGuard and thereby exposes "magic" IP tunnels
```

> that work in any network setup to the rest of the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that work reliably across all network environments completely agnostic to the application sitting above.
```

Author: I am not sure I full understand what you are trying to say with this change. It is kind of a given that a library is agnostic towards its dependents otherwise you would have circular dependencies?

Reviewer: Oh my point was just that the sentence there didn't seem to make sense `will work ... to the rest of the application` maybe missing a word?

Author: "exposes IP tunnels (that work in any network setup) to the rest of the application"

Is what I wanted to say but perhaps that grammer is too German :)

`snownet` builds on top of `str0m`, a sans-IO WebRTC library and `boringtun`, an

> (almost[^2]) sans-IO wireguard implementation. We don’t need the majority of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(almost[^2]) sans-IO WireGuard implementation. We don’t need the majority of the
```

WebRTC stack though. The only thing we are interested in is the `IceAgent` which
implements [RFC 8445](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8445). ICE uses a
clever algorithm that ensures two agents, deployed into arbitrary network
environments find the most optimal communication path to each other. The result

> of ICE is a pair of socket addresses that we then use to perform a wireguard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of ICE is a pair of socket addresses that we then use to perform a WireGuard
```

itself. The eventloop is responsible for "querying" the state (like
`poll_transmit`), executing it and also passing new input to the state machine
(`handle_timeout` and `handle_input`). To some people, this may appear as
unnecessary boilerplate but it comes with a great benefit: flexibility.

- Want to make use of `sendmmsg` to reduce the number of syscalls when sending
  packets? No problem.
- Want to multiplex multiple protocols over a single socket? No problem.

Writing the eventloop yourself is an opportunity to be able to tune our code to
exactly what we want it to do. This also makes maintenance easier for library
authors: They can focus on correctly implementing protocol functionality instead
of having debates around async runtimes or exposing APIs to set socket options.

A good example here is `str0m`’s stance on enumerating network interfaces: This
is an IO concern and up to the application on how to achieve it. `str0m` only
provides an API to add the socket addresses as ICE candidate to the current
state. As a result, we are able to easily implement optimisations such as
gathering TURN candidates prior to any connection being made, thus reducing

> firezone's connection-setup latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firezone's connection-setup latency.
```

<Alert color="info">
  In ICE, both parties gather candidates (sockets) and then test connectivity
  between them. See https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8445#section-5.1.1
  for details.
</Alert>

### Testing at the speed of light

sans-IO code is essentially side-effect free and thus lends itself extremely
well for (unit) tests. Due to sockets and time being abstracted away, it becomes
a breeze to write tests that advance time by 5 minutes in an instant. All we
need to do is pass a modified `Instant` to our function and assert, how the code
behaves. To see a real world example of this,
[check out](https://github.com/firezone/firezone/blob/53557f46e452c0fe5195a4326873753a356c6005/rust/connlib/snownet/tests/lib.rs#L123-L127)
how we test that `snownet` closes idle connections after 5 minutes.

Similarly, actually sending data over a socket takes (a little bit of) time and
more importantly, requires allocation of ports etc. In a sans-IO world, "sending
data" in a test is as simple as taking a `Transmit` from party B and calling
`handle_input` on the state of party A. No need to go through a network socket!

> At firezone, we took this idea one step further. We implemented a reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At Firezone, we took this idea one step further. We implemented a reference
```

state machine that describes how we want `connlib` to work. This reference state
machine is used as the source of truth in our tests. We then leverage
`proptest`'s support for
[state machine testing](https://proptest-rs.github.io/proptest/proptest/state-machine.html)
to deterministically sample and execute thousands of scenarios on every CI run
and compare the reference state machine with `connlib`'s actual state. The

> details of this go beyond the scope of this post but we are planning to publish
> one about that topic in particular too! The key take-away here is that a sans-IO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
details of this go beyond the scope of this post, so stay tuned for a followup about that topic in particular too! The key take-away here is that a sans-IO
```

In a sans-IO design we only have synchronous APIs, i.e. none of the functions on
a state machines ever block on IO or time. Instead, they are just data
structures.

Those two aspects work exceptionally well together. We can use `&mut` liberally
to express state changes and thus leverage the borrow-checker to ensure our code
is sound. In comparison, `async` Rust and `&mut` almost feel somewhat at odds
with each other.

In Rust, `async` functions are just syntax sugar for a data structure that
implements `Future`. Spawning a `Future` into a runtime[^1] like `tokio`
requires this data structure to be `'static` and therefore, it cannot contain
any references, including `&mut`. To mutate state that isn't local to the
`Future`, you basically have two options:

- Use reference-counted pointers and a mutex, i.e. `Arc<Mutex<T>>`
- Use "actors" and connect them via channels, i.e. spawn multiple tasks with
  loops that read and write to channels

Both of these options have a runtime overhead: Locks can result in contention
and sending messages through channels requires copying. In addition, multiple
tasks running inside a runtime operate in a non-deterministic order which can

> easily lead to race conditions and in the worst-case, dead-locks. It appears

Reviewer: ```suggestion
easily lead to race conditions and in the worst case, deadlocks. It appears
```

that with either of these options, we arrive at a design that feels brittle, is

> prone to dead-locks and no longer employs zero-cost abstractions, yet avoiding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
prone to deadlocks and no longer employs zero-cost abstractions, yet avoiding
```

> all of these is one of the reasons we wanted to use Rust in the first-place!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all of these is one of the reasons we wanted to use Rust in the first place!
```

On the other hand, if need to express larger, sequential workflows, manually
modelling them out as state machines could become tedious.

Finally, the sans-IO design is not particularly wide-spread (yet) in the Rust
community. As a result, there are very few libraries out there that follow it.
Most of them will either implement blocking or non-blocking IO instead of
sans-IO.

## Closing

Writing sans-IO code is unusual at first but really enjoyable once you get the
hang of it. In part, this is because Rust provides great tools for modelling
state machines. More so, the fact that sans-IO forces you to handle errors as
you would any other input simply feels like the way networking code should be
written.

That being said, there are additional ways of writing async Rust not discussed
in this post. The most notable of those being structured concurrency which sits
somewhere "in the middle" between sans-IO and the async Rust portrayed in this
post. Read [this article](https://without.boats/blog/let-futures-be-futures/)
from withoutboats for more on that topic.

Many thanks to [@algesten](https://github.com/algesten) for providing feedback
on drafts of this post.

> Discuss this post on [Hackernews](TODO) or [Reddit](TODO).

Author: ```suggestion
<!-- Discuss this post on [Hackernews](TODO) or [Reddit](TODO). -->
```

On the other hand, if need to express larger, sequential workflows, manually
modelling them out as state machines could become tedious.

Finally, the sans-IO design is not particularly wide-spread (yet) in the Rust
community. As a result, there are very few libraries out there that follow it.
Most of them will either implement blocking or non-blocking IO instead of
sans-IO.

## Closing

Writing sans-IO code is unusual at first but really enjoyable once you get the
hang of it. In part, this is because Rust provides great tools for modelling
state machines. More so, the fact that sans-IO forces you to handle errors as
you would any other input simply feels like the way networking code should be
written.

That being said, there are additional ways of writing async Rust not discussed
in this post. The most notable of those being structured concurrency which sits
somewhere "in the middle" between sans-IO and the async Rust portrayed in this
post. Read [this article](https://without.boats/blog/let-futures-be-futures/)
from withoutboats for more on that topic.

Many thanks to [@algesten](https://github.com/algesten) for providing feedback
on drafts of this post.

> // Discuss this post on [Hackernews](TODO) or [Reddit](TODO).

Author: ```suggestion
```

this. sans-IO design also compose very well, tend to have very flexible APIs,
are easy to test and play well with Rust's features.

### Easy composition

Take another look at the API of `StunBinding`. The main functions exposed to the
eventloop are: `handle_timeout`, `handle_input`, `poll_transmit` &
`poll_timeout`. None of these are specific to the domain of STUN! Most network
protocols can be implemented with these or some variation of them. As a result,
it is very easy to compose these state machines together: Want to query 5 STUN
servers for your public IP? No problem. Just make 5 `StunBinding`s and call them
in order[^3].

In the case of firezone, you can see this in the example of
[`snownet`](https://github.com/firezone/firezone/tree/main/rust/connlib/snownet),
a library that combines ICE & wireguard and thereby exposes "magic" IP tunnels
that work in any network setup to the rest of the application.

`snownet` builds on top of `str0m`, a sans-IO WebRTC library and `boringtun`, an
(almost[^2]) sans-IO wireguard implementation. We don’t need the majority of the
WebRTC stack though. The only thing we are interested in is the `IceAgent` which

> implements [RFC 8845](https://github.com/cloudflare/boringtun/issues/391). ICE

Reviewer 2: Did you mean to link to IceAgent here?

Author: Yes :D

simply houses an `IceAgent` and a wireguard tunnel, dispatching incoming
messages to either one or the other.

### Flexible APIs

sans-IO code needs to be "driven" by an eventloop of some sorts because it
"just" expresses the state of the system but doesn’t cause any side-effects
itself. The eventloop is responsible for "querying" the state (like
`poll_transmit`), executing it and also passing new input to the state machine
(`handle_timeout` and `handle_input`). To some people, this may appear as
unnecessary boilerplate but it comes with a great benefit: flexibility.

- Want to make use of `sendmmsg` to reduce the number of syscalls when sending
  packets? No problem.
- Want to multiplex multiple protocols over a single socket? No problem.

Writing the eventloop yourself is an opportunity to be able to tune our code to
exactly what we want it to do. This also makes maintenance easier for library
authors: They can focus on correctly implementing protocol functionality instead
of having debates around async runtimes or exposing APIs to set socket options.

> A good example here is `str0m`’s stance on the gathering of candidates: This is

Reviewer 2: Maybe add some word around "enumerating network interfaces" or similar for people not familiar with ICE?

    Connecting {
        /// Socket addresses from which we might receive data (even before we are connected).
        possible_sockets: HashSet<SocketAddr>,
        /// Packets emitted by wireguard whilst are still running ICE.
        ///
        /// This can happen if the remote's WG session initiation arrives at our socket before we nominate it.
        /// A session initiation requires a response that we must not drop, otherwise the connection setup experiences unnecessary delays.
        buffered: RingBuffer<Vec<u8>>,
    },
    /// A socket has been nominated.
    Connected {
        /// Our nominated socket.
        peer_socket: PeerSocket,
        /// Other addresses that we might see traffic from (e.g.
        STUN messages during roaming).
        possible_sockets: HashSet<SocketAddr>,
    },
    /// The connection failed in an unrecoverable way and will be GC'd.
    Failed,
    /// The connection is idle and will be GC'd.
    Idle,
}
```

The key things about the above model are the invariants around which data is
available in a particular state. For example, buffered packets can only happen

> whilst we are Connecting. Once we are Connected, there is no more need to buffer

Reviewer 2: For me, the importance of `&mut` can't be overstated. To me that's even more important than function coloring. To elaborate:

Maybe the most central concept in Rust, or the reason for it to exist as a language, is the borrow checker: which is all about the safe use of `&mut`.

In async code it's rarely appropriate to hold `&mut` references across an `.await` point to anything which isn't local to the task.

Thus in some respects async is at odds with the most fundamental part of Rust. 

Arc-Mutex, actors/channels, interior mutability all have their place, but async forces us to reach for them straight away. I think this often results in less good design and spaghetti code. 

Sans-IO allows us to structure the code in a lock free way by passing around `&mut` references – and it really brings out how great Rust is (sync Rust that is).

Reviewer 2: Hm. You do bring out these points below. I'll leave my comment anyway :)

Author: Do you think it comes out early enough? I could perhaps trim this section and remove the `Connection` bit. Most people probably don't need to be reminded of Rust's ADT features. That would place more emphasis on `&mut`.

I'll try this and see how it feels.

locking this `Mutex`? Instead, it is all just nested state machines and regular
function calls.

## The downsides

There are no silver-bullets and sans-IO is no exception to this. Whilst writing
your own eventloop gives you great control, it can also result in subtle bugs
that are initially hard to find.

For example, a bug in the state machine where the value returned from
`poll_timeout` is not advanced can lead to a busy-looping behaviour in the
eventloop.

Also, sequential workflows require more code to be written. In Rust, `async`
functions compile down to state machines, with each `.await` point representing
a transition to a different state. This makes it easy for developers to write
sequential code together with non-blocking IO. Without `async`, we need to write
our own state machines for expressing the various steps. How annoying this will
be in practise depends on your problem domain. Modelling a request-response
protocol is not very difficult as we've seen in the example of a `StunBinding`.
On the other hand, if need to express larger, sequential workflows, manually
modelling them out as state machines could become tedious.

> Finally, the sans-IO design is not particularly wide-spread (yet) in the Rust

Reviewer 2: You could add a link to withoutboats – the maker of async Rust (or at least the `Pin` trait) blog for anyone who wants a deeper analysis. This one briefly discusses Sans-IO and str0m https://without.boats/blog/let-futures-be-futures/

I think boats' "intra task concurrency" advantages of async vs your thoughts on running multiple STUN requests is an interesting illustration of how Sans-IO can be an alternative to async.

Author: Added a short paragraph linking to the post!
